Title 430 – National Soil Survey Handbook
(430-624-H, 1st Ed., Amend. 25, Nov. 2017)
624-A.1
Part 624 – Soil Quality
Subpart A – General Information
624.0 Definition and Purpose
A. Definition.—“Soil quality” is the continued capacity of soil to function as a vital living ecosystem
that sustains plants, animals, and humans.
B. Purpose.—Considering that soil quality is the capacity of a soil to function, specific functions of
concern should be clear when applying the concept. Common examples of specific soil functions are—
(1) Sustaining biological activity, diversity, and productivity.
(2) Regulating and partitioning water and solute flow.
(3) Filtering, buffering, degrading, immobilizing, and detoxifying organic and inorganic materials,
including industrial and municipal byproducts and atmospheric deposition.
(4) Storing and cycling nutrients and other elements within the earth’s biosphere.
(5) Providing support of socioeconomic structures (i.e., buildings and roads) and protection for
archeological treasures associated with human habitation.
C. Components.—Soil quality integrates the biological, chemical, and physical components and
processes of a soil with its surroundings. Whether a research plot, field, watershed, or the earth; the
concept that soil functions within a larger system remains a key consideration in assessment of soil
quality.
D. Views and Concepts.—Views differ on soil quality depending on the background of individuals and
their relationship to the land.
(1) Some of these views and concepts include—
(i) Inherent properties of soil as determined by the soil forming factors.
(ii) Highly productive land, sustaining or enhancing productivity, maximizing profits, or
maintaining the soil resource for future generations.
(iii) Plentiful, healthful, and inexpensive food for present and future generations.
(iv) Soil in harmony with the landscape and its surroundings.
(v) Soil functioning at its potential in an ecosystem.
(2) The concept of soil quality is also viewed from various scales of concern:
(i) For the land manager, productivity and sustainability are important.
(ii) For members of a community, the health or the ability of the watershed to maintain a
healthy neighborhood and environment is important.
(iii) For national policy makers, an assessment of the overall quality and trends of the Nation’s
soil resources are important for sustaining and ensuring food and water supply and national
security.
624.1 Quality Concepts
Soils naturally vary in their capacity to function; therefore, an important part of the definition is the
concept that quality is specific to each kind of soil (soil map unit component). The quality of a soil has
two distinct but related parts, inherent and dynamic qualities.
(1) Inherent Quality.—Inherent quality represents intrinsic properties (qualities) of soils as
determined by the factors of soil formation—climate, topography, biota, parent material, and
time. The inherent quality of soils is often used to compare the capabilities of one soil against
another and to evaluate the worth or suitability of soils for specific uses. For example, given all
other determining properties being equal, a loam soil will have a higher water holding capacity
Title 430 – National Soil Survey Handbook
(430-624-H, 1st Ed., Amend. 25, Nov. 2017)
624-A.2
than a sandy soil. Thus, the loam soil will have a higher inherent quality for storing water and
lower inherent quality for producing a freely drained condition.
(3) Use-Invariant Properties.—Many properties that have traditionally been recorded in the
interpretive and taxonomic databases of the National Cooperative Soil Survey Program are not
subject to change by commonly practiced soil use. They are use-invariant. Particle size
distribution (texture) is an example of a use-invariant property. Since common land practices
only disturb the soil to a depth of about 30 centimeters, the properties below this depth are
normally use-invariant.
(4) Dynamic Quality.—Dynamic quality is determined by soil properties that are influenced by
human use and management decisions. These properties are use-dependent properties and may
be temporal (dynamic) of the soil. Bulk density near the surface and organic matter content are
two such properties.
(5) Use-Dependent Properties.—Use-dependent properties most often manifest in surface and
subsurface layers. These properties include physical, chemical, and biological properties.
Certain management practices and uses of the land have a positive effect on specific soil
properties such as increasing organic matter content. Other management practices may
negatively impact the soil by causing compaction, erosion, or acidification. Collectively,
management will either improve or reduce health of the soil. This dynamic aspect of soil
quality is the focal point of the concern for assessing the state (or quality) of the soil resource.
(6) Reference Condition.—The reference condition is defined by a range of values for key soil
properties (indicators) that represent conditions of the soil functioning at full capacity such as
soil conditions under management systems that use best management practices. Values for the
reference condition can eventually be used as criteria in the Field Office Technical Guide for
evaluating the soil condition (quality).
(7) Soil Health Evaluation.—Soil health can be evaluated relative to a standard or reference
condition that represents the full capacity of a soil to function for a specific use. The reference
condition is often based on use-invariant properties in conjunction with the dynamic properties.
Soil properties are used to group soils that function similarly. Reference values are developed
for the key properties of soils that reflect the capacity of the soil to function. Evaluation of soil
quality or health must be tied to soil functions and the specific use of the soil.
Soil health can also be evaluated by establishing a baseline condition for the use-dependent
properties (indicators). After a period of years, the use-dependent properties are measured
again and compared to the baseline.
