Title 430 – National Soil Survey Handbook
(430-655-H, 1st
Ed., Amend. 25, Nov 2017)
655-1
Part 655 – Technical Soil Services
655.0 Definition
Technical soil services are the presentation and application of soil survey information. In addition,
technical soil services may include soil scientists providing soils information using onsite
investigations to enhance and localize soil survey information for site-level application. Soil scientists
help users understand the soil survey, apply soil information to specific needs, and integrate soil
survey information with other resources and technology. Technical soil services include the
derivation and application of soil information to meet USDA and NRCS policy and program needs.
Technical soil services are cooperative efforts of the National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS). See
the Technical Soil Services Handbook for more detailed information. It is available online at the
following URL: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/ref/?cid=nrcs142p2_053400.
655.1 Types of Service
Technical soil services provide five basic types of service: technical policy and program services;
planning services; site-specific soil investigations, testing, interpretation, and evaluation; expert
services for judicial requests; and information services.
(1) Technical Policy and Program Services.—Technical policy and program services are for
Federal agencies, State, Tribal, or local units of government, or private groups or individuals
that use technical soil survey information in their policy and programs. These services ensure
that those government policies that support improved planning, management, or regulation of
lands use current and official soil survey information. The Web Soil Survey provides access
to the agency’s official soil survey information, which is the source of soil survey information
in the Field Office Technical Guide. The Field Office Technical Guide is an interdisciplinary
document. Formal agreements that include a general reference to technical soil services
provide the operational authority to NRCS when it assists other agencies.
(2) Planning Services.—Planning services are the technical interpretation of soil survey
information for the development of plans that include conservation practices and systems.
Soil conservation district cooperators and USDA program participants are the primary
recipients of these planning services. Recipients also include Federal agencies, State
governments, or local governments. Planning services involve recommendations on specific
tracts of land. Formal agreement with the soil conservation district as a cooperator or a
formal agreement with NRCS that includes specific reference to technical soil services
provides the operational authority for NRCS.
(3) Site-Specific Soil Investigations, Testing, Interpretation, and Evaluation.—Site-specific soil
investigations, testing, interpretation, and evaluation are services that support the design and
installation of works and structures or the implementation of agricultural practices or that test
and evaluate research predictions. These technical soil services are part of NRCS technical
assistance to individual cooperators or units of government that have signed agreements
specifying the services. The intention of services to individual cooperators is usually to help
apply a conservation plan. These services are described in general terms in district
agreements with NRCS. They are very site specific and often result in design and practice
specifications.
(4) Expert Services for Judicial Requests.—Expert services related to judicial requests are
technical soil services that originate as a result of legal actions affecting Federal, State, or
Title 430 – National Soil Survey Handbook
(430-655-H, 1st
Ed., Amend. 25, Nov 2017)
655-2
local governments involved with soil resource data. Agency policy requires agency advice
and authority from NRCS management and USDA legal counsel before these services are
provided. Contact your supervisor if you are subpoenaed by a court, are requested to be an
expert witness, or if legal services are requested by any means. Also refer to 7 CFR Section
1.210 and subsequent sections through 7 CFR Section 1.219 (also known as subpart K). Part
635 of the Technical Soil Services Handbook provides detailed guidance and
recommendations on acting as an expert witness:
https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/ref/?cid=nrcs142p2_053396.
(5) Information Services.—Information services are the distribution and explanation of National
Cooperative Soil Survey procedures and standards, including the technical content and use of
soil survey products. Delivery of these services does not require a formal agreement.
655.2 Policy
A. NRCS technical soil services, except for Farmland Protection Policy Act requests and information
services, go to or through Federal, State, and local units of government with which there is a
memorandum of understanding or a cooperative agreement.
B. Onsite technical assistance to private individuals is provided only though formal agreements with
government entities, such as conservation districts, that specify the services. This assistance relates
directly to NRCS programs and is defined in the conservation district memorandum of understanding.
655.3 Responsibilities
Soil scientists provide technical soil services both within the framework of NCSS and as part of other
programs. The responsibility for providing these services is delegated to resource soil scientists, State
soil scientists, the national leader for technical soil services, national technical support centers, and
National Headquarters. For more information on these responsibilities, see part 604 of the Technical
Soil Services Handbook. The handbook is available online at the following URL:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/soils/ref/?cid=nrcs142p2_053400.
