Part 622 - Interpretive Groups
Subpart A - General Information
622.0 Definition and Purpose
A. Definition.-Interpretative groups are specified land use and specific management groupings that
are assigned to soil areas because combinations of soils have similar behavior for specified practices.
Most are based on soil properties and other factors that directly influence the specific use of the soil.
B. Purpose.-Interpretative groups allow users of soil surveys to plan and compare reasonable
alternatives for the use and management of soils.
622.1 Procedures and Responsibilities
A. Procedures.-The soil criteria used to determine the rating are coordinated nationally. Data
elements, classes, or groups that are used in national legislation have strict adherence to national
procedures. Guides that are developed locally or by States to rate soil survey land classification and
groups are reviewed according to the procedure discussed in Part 617, Section 617.03 of this
handbook. Prime farmland, hydrologic soil groups, and other interpretative groups important to many
different users are published in the soil survey report.
B. Responsibilities.-The state soil scientist is responsible for program-specific and State
interpretative group assignments to map units and soil components, as appropriate. The state soil
scientist ensures that all nationally significant interpretative group assignments to map units and soil
components are included in the official soil survey database.
622.2 Land Capability Classification
A. Definition.-Land capability classification is a system of grouping soils primarily on the basis of
their capability to produce common cultivated crops and pasture plants without deteriorating over a
long period of time.
B. Classes.-Land capability classification is subdivided into capability class and capability subclass
nationally. Some States also assign a capability unit.
C. Significance.-Land capability classification has value as a grouping of soils. National Resource
Inventory information, and many field office technical guides have been assembled according to these
classes. The system has been adopted in many textbooks and has wide public acceptance. Some
State legislation has used the system for various applications. Users should reference Agriculture
Handbook No. 210 (available online at: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/soils/ref/
under Technical References) for a listing of assumptions and broad wording used to define the
capability class and capability subclass.
D. Application.-All map unit components, including miscellaneous areas, are assigned a capability
class and subclass. Agriculture Handbook No. 210 provides general guidance, and individual State
guides provide assignments of the class and subclass applicable to the State. Land capability units
can be used to differentiate subclasses at the discretion of the State. Capability class and subclass are
assigned to map unit components in the official soil survey database.
Part 618, Subpart B, Exhibits, Section 622.16 provides an overall schematic of some of the soil
properties and qualities than can be used to assign land capability classes (LCC) to all map unit
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
components. Part 618, Subpart B, Exhibits, Sections 622.17 and 622.20 are State-specific guides used
to assign land capability classes to all map unit components in the States of California and Indiana,
respectively. They provide examples of the soil properties and qualities used to determine
assignments of LCC. Part 618, Subpart B, Exhibits, Sections 622.18 and 622.21 are examples of
guides used to assign land capability subclasses to soil map unit components in the States of
California and Indiana, respectively. Part 618, Subpart B, Exhibits, Section 622.19 is an example of a
State-specific guide used to assign land capability units to soil map unit components in the State of
California. None of these guides contains detailed information that applies to all soils of the United
States. Criteria for the assignment of land capability classifications to map unit components should
be developed for each State within national standards.
For map unit components that occur wholly within a State for a major land resource area (MLRA)
that does not extend into another State, the state soil scientists should work with the MLRAsoil
survey leaders in developing land capability class and subclass criteria that are within Agriculture
Handbook No. 210. Where the same kind of map unit component extends beyond State boundaries,
the soil survey regional director will provide technical leadership to state soil scientists, MLRA soil
survey leaders, and others to achieve uniform land capability class and subclass criteria between the
States, soil survey offices, and MLRA soil survey areas. The Soil and Plant Science Division (SPSD)
national staff provides technical assistance to the state soil scientists and the MLRA soil survey
leaders in writing land capability class and subclass criteria and coordinates assignment of capability
class and subclass to map unit components. This includes reviewing assigned class and subclass to
lists of soils and miscellaneous areas and resolving coordination problems that may occur among
States, soil survey offices, and soil survey regional offices.
E. Categories
(1) Capability Class
(i) Definition.-Capability class is the broadest category in the land capability classification
system. Class codes I (1), II (2), III (3), IV (4), V (5), VI (6), VII (7), and VIII (8) are
used to represent both irrigated and nonirrigated land capability classes.
(ii) Classes and definitions.-The following definitions, from Agriculture Handbook No.
210, have been slightly altered.
- Class I (1) soils have slight limitations that restrict their use.
- Class II (2) soils have moderate limitations that reduce the choice of plants or require
moderate conservation practices.
- Class III (3) soils have severe limitations that reduce the choice of plants or require
special conservation practices, or both.
- Class IV (4) soils have very severe limitations that restrict the choice of plants or
require very careful management, or both.
- Class V (5) soils have little or no hazard of erosion but have other limitations,
impractical to remove, that limit their use mainly to pasture, rangeland, forestland, or
wildlife habitat.
- Class VI (6) soils have severe limitations that make them generally unsuited to
cultivation and that limit their use mainly to pasture, rangeland, forestland, or wildlife
habitat.
- Class VII (7) soils have very severe limitations that make them unsuited to
cultivation and that restrict their use mainly to rangeland, forestland, or wildlife
habitat.
- Class VIII (8) soils and miscellaneous areas have limitations that preclude their use
for commercial plant production and limit their use mainly to recreation, wildlife
habitat, water supply, or esthetic purposes.
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
(2) Capability Subclass
(i) Definition.-Capability subclass is the second category in the land capability
classification system. Class codes e, w, s, and c are used for land capability subclasses.
(ii) Subclasses and definitions
- Subclass e is made up of soils for which the susceptibility to erosion is the dominant
problem or hazard affecting their use. Erosion susceptibility and past erosion damage
are the major soil factors that affect soils in this subclass.
- Subclass w is made up of soils for which excess water is the dominant hazard or
limitation affecting their use. Poor soil drainage, wetness, a high water table, and
overflow are the factors that affect soils in this subclass.
- Subclass s is made up of soils that have soil limitations within the rooting zone, such
as shallowness of the rooting zone, stones, low moisture-holding capacity, low
fertility that is difficult to correct, and salinity or sodium content.
- Subclass c is made up of soils for which the climate (the temperature or lack of
moisture) is the major hazard or limitation affecting their use.
(iii) Application.-The subclass represents the dominant limitation that determines the
capability class. Within a capability class, where the kinds of limitations are essentially
equal, the subclasses have the following priority: e, w, s, and c. See the rules (shown
below) on appropriate entries for capability subclass.
(3) Capability Unit
(i) Definition.-Capability unit is the first category described in the land capability
classification system. It is a grouping of one or more individual soil map units having
similar potentials and continuing limitations or hazards.
(ii) Application.-Use of this category and definition of codes are State options.
F. Entries.-Enter the appropriate land capability class for each map unit component, including
miscellaneous areas. Enter the land capability subclass only for soil map unit components which are
assigned to capability classes 2 through 7. Capability subclasses are not assigned to soil components
in capability class I (1) and are not assigned to soil or miscellaneous area components in capability
class VIII (8). Subclass e is not used with soil components assigned to capability class V (5). Enter
the appropriate capability unit code, if one is to be used in the area. Allowable entries for capability
class are I (1), II (2), III (3), IV (4), V (5), VI (6), VII (7), or VIII (8). Allowable entries for subclass
are e, w, s, or c. Valid entries for capability unit are integers ranging from 1 to 99. Enter the
nonirrigated land capability class for all map unit components, including miscellaneous areas. Enter
the irrigated land capability class and subclass if the soil map unit component is irrigated or
potentially will be irrigated.
622.3 Farmland Classification
A. Definition.-The farmland classification designates map units as prime farmland, farmland of
statewide importance, farmland of local importance, or farmland of unique importance. Soil map
units with components of prime farmland are classified as prime where 50 percent or more of the
components in the map unit composition are prime; of statewide importance where less than 50
percent of the components in the map unit are prime but a combination of lands of prime or statewide
importance is 50 percent or more of the map unit composition; of local importance where less than 50
percent of the components in the map unit are of prime or statewide importance but the total of land
of prime, statewide, and/or local importance is 50 percent or more of the map unit composition. All
other soil map units are shown as not farmland unless they are designated as unique.
(1) Prime farmland https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/CFR-2012-title7-vol6/CFR-2012-title7-
vol6-part657/content-detail.html ) is defined as land that has the best combination of physical
and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops and that
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
is available for these uses. It has the combination of soil properties, growing season, and
moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields of crops in an economic manner if it
is treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods. In general, prime farmland
has an adequate and dependable water supply from precipitation or irrigation, a favorable
temperature and growing season, an acceptable level of acidity or alkalinity, an acceptable
content of salt or sodium, and few or no rocks. Its soils are permeable to water and air.
Prime farmland is not excessively eroded or saturated with water for long periods of time,
and it either does not flood frequently during the growing season or is protected from
flooding. Users of the lists of prime farmland map units should recognize that soil properties
are only one of several criteria that are necessary. Other considerations for prime farmland
are the following:
(i) Land use.-Prime farmland is designated independently of current land use, but it cannot
be areas of water or urban or built-up land. Map units that are complexes or associations
containing components of urban land or other miscellaneous areas, as defined in the Soil
Survey Manual as part of the map unit name (i.e., major components), cannot be
designated as prime farmland. The soil survey memorandum of understanding
determines the scale of mapping, and local land use interests should be considered in
designing map units.
(ii) Flooding frequency.-Some map units may include both prime farmland and land not
prime farmland because of variations in flooding frequency.
(iii) Irrigation.-Some map units have areas with a developed irrigation water supply that is
dependable and of adequate quality while other areas do not have such a supply. In these
map units, only the irrigated areas meet the prime farmland criteria.
(iv) Water table.-Most map units are drained but a few undrained areas are included. Only
the drained areas meet the prime farmland criteria.
(v) Wind erodibility.-The product of I (soil erodibility) x C (climate factor) cannot exceed
60 to meet prime farmland criteria.
(2) Unique farmland is land other than prime farmland that is used for the production of specific
high-value food and fiber crops. It has the special combination of soil quality, location,
growing season, and moisture supply needed to economically produce sustained high-quality
and/or high yields of a specific crop when treated and managed according to acceptable
farming methods. Examples of such crops are citrus, tree nuts, olives, cranberries, fruit, and
vegetables.
The specific characteristics of unique farmland are the following:
(i) It is used for a specific high-value food or fiber crop;
(ii) It has a moisture supply that is adequate for the specific crop (the supply is from stored
moisture, precipitation, or a developed irrigation system); and
(iii) It combines favorable factors of soil quality, growing season, temperature, humidity, air
drainage, elevation, aspect, or other conditions, such as nearness to market, that favor the
growth of a specific food or fiber crop.
B. Significance.-Farmland classification identifies the location and extent of the most suitable land
for producing food, feed, fiber, forage, and oilseed crops. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) has national leadership for the management and maintenance of the resource base
that supports the productive capacity of American agriculture. This management and maintenance
includes identifying, locating, and determining the extent of the most suitable land for producing
food, feed, fiber, forage, and oilseed crops. Prime farmland information is one of the four
designations of farmland. An NRCS state conservationist can approve and have recorded in the field
office technical guide (FOTG) a list of soil map units that meet soil information-based criteria, as
determined by the appropriate State agency, for additional farmland of statewide importance. The
state conservationist also can approve and have recorded in the FOTG a list of soil map units
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
identified as additional farmland of local importance by the local agency or agencies if the units are
capable of producing crops but do not meet criteria for prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland
of statewide importance.
C. Measurement.-NRCS policy and procedures on farmland are published in the Code of Federal
Regulations 7CFR657. This regulation is reproduced in Part 618, Subpart B, Exhibits, Section 622.15
for convenience. It is also available online at:
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2000/09/25/00-24525/prime-and-unique-farmlands-
important-farmlands-inventory.
D. Policy.-State soil scientists prepare and maintain a current list of soil survey map units that meet
the soil criteria for farmland classification. The list given in field office technical guides is for users
concerned with only a single part of a subset of the State list. The state soil scientist ensures that
farmland soil interpretations are made for all soil map units in the State. Soil map units that qualify
as prime farmlands are coordinated with adjacent States.
E. Entries.-Enter the numerical code for the classification of each map unit. Soils of unique,
statewide, or local importance are not prime farmland. Allowable entries and numerical choice codes
are the following:
0 - Not prime farmland.
1 - All areas are prime farmland.
2 - Prime farmland if drained.
3 - Prime farmland if protected from flooding or not frequently flooded during the growing
season.
4 - Prime farmland if irrigated.
5 - Prime farmland if drained and either protected from flooding or not frequently flooded
during the growing season.
6 - Prime farmland if irrigated and drained.
7 - Prime farmland if irrigated and either protected from flooding or not frequently flooded
during the growing season.
8 - Prime farmland if subsoiled, completely removing the root-inhibiting soil layer.
9 - Prime farmland if irrigated and the product of I (soil erodibility) \u00d7 C (climate factor) does
not exceed 60.
10 - Prime farmland if irrigated and reclaimed of excess salts and sodium.
30 - Farmland of statewide importance.
32 - Farmland of statewide importance, if drained.
33 - Farmland of statewide importance, if protected from flooding or not frequently flooded
during the growing season.
34 - Farmland of statewide importance, if irrigated.
35 - Farmland of statewide importance, if drained and either protected from flooding or not
frequently flooded during the growing season.
36 - Farmland of statewide importance, if irrigated and drained.
37 - Farmland of statewide importance, if irrigated and either protected from flooding or not
frequently flooded during the growing season.
38 - Farmland of statewide importance, if subsoiled, completely removing the root-inhibiting soil
layer.
39 - Farmland of statewide importance, if irrigated and the product of I (soil erodibility) \u00d7 C
(climate factor) does not exceed 60.
40 - Farmland of statewide importance, if irrigated and reclaimed of excess salts and sodium.
41 - Farmland of statewide importance, if drained or either protected from flooding or not
frequently flooded during the growing season.
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
42 - Farmland of statewide importance, if warm enough, and either drained or either protected
from flooding or not frequently flooded during the growing season.
43 - Farmland of statewide importance, if warm enough.
44 - Farmland of statewide importance, if thawed.
50 - Farmland of local importance.
54 - Farmland of local importance, if irrigated.
70 - Farmland of unique importance.
F. Quality Control of Prime Farmland Map Units
(1) NRCS policy and procedures on important farmlands are published in 7 CFR Part 657.
Determination of prime farmland map units in each State is based on guidelines provided by
Soil and Plant Science Division (SPSD) national staff. The National LESA Handbook
includes methodology for evaluating soils for prime farmland that applies the criteria
established in 7 CFR Part 657.5. A NASIS report has been developed to identify concerns in
the classification of prime farmland based on soil properties. The report can be used for
guidance but does not suffice as the sole determinant for prime farmland map units.
(2) Each prime farmland map unit must be documented, by either use of the report or criteria as
defined in 7 CFR Part 657, or by a statement of reasons that explain the decision.
(3) Some soil survey map units may meet the soil criteria for prime farmland, but additional
investigation is needed before a final determination is made. The measures needed to qualify
the soil as prime farmland are indicated by an appropriate footnote or in a parenthetic
statement of explanation that follows the map unit name on the list.
622.4 Highly Erodible Land - Highly Erodible Soil Map Unit List
A. Definition.-Highly erodible land is defined by the Sodbuster, Conservation Reserve, and
Conservation Compliance parts of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture,
Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990. Determinations for highly erodible land are based on an
erodibility index as defined in the National Food Security Act Manual.
B. Policy.-Lists of highly erodible and potential highly erodible map units are maintained in the
field office technical guide (available online at http://efotg.sc.egov.usda.gov/efotg_locator.aspx?map).
Policy and procedures for developing and maintaining the lists are given in Part 511 of the National
Food Security Act Manual, 5th edition, November 2010 (available at
http://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov/RollupViewer.aspx?hid=29362).
622.5 Hydric Soils
A. Definition.-A hydric soil is a soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding, or
ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
Hydric soils along with hydrophytic vegetation and wetland hydrology are used to define wetlands.
B. Policy.-The current criteria for generating a list of hydric soils is in the Federal Register,
February 29, 2012, volume 77, number 40, page 12234: https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-02-
29/pdf/2012-4733.pdf . The reference for field identification of hydric soils and their delineation is
Field Indicators of Hydric Soils of the United States: A Guide for Identifying and Delineating Hydric
Soils. The latest version is available online at
https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/soils/ref/ under Field Guides.
C. Procedures.-Hydric soil determinations are made in the field and not in the office. The state soil
scientist is responsible for program-specific and State interpretative group assignments to map units
and soil components, as appropriate, including component hydric ratings and component hydric
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
criteria. The following rules are for populating hydric soil rating and component hydric criteria in
NASIS:
Hydric Rating
(1) All major or minor components should be assigned a hydric rating of yes, no, or unranked.
(2) All soil components should be rated either as hydric rating=yes or hydric rating=no.
(3) All miscellaneous area components, should be assigned hydric rating=no. Miscellaneous
area components (including water) are by definition, non-soil, and therefore cannot be hydric
soils.
(4) Whenever there is doubt about the hydric soil rating for any soil component based on the
criteria, the assignment should be hydric rating=unranked. When unranked is the hydric
rating, an on-site investigation is required to determine component hydric rating, and
component hydric criteria.
Hydric Criteria
(1) If a component is populated with hydric rating =yes, then appropriate component hydric
criteria should be populated also.
(2) If a component is populated with hydric rating =no or is unranked, then no component hydric
criteria should be populated.
622.6 Ecological Sites
A. Definition.-An ecological site is a distinctive kind of land with specific physical characteristics
that differs from other kinds of land in its ability to produce a distinctive kind and amount of
vegetation. An ecological site is recognized and described on the basis of the characteristics that
differentiate it from other sites in its ability to produce and support a characteristic plant community.
For details on developing ecological site descriptions refer to the National Ecological Site Handbook.
B. Policy.-Soil-ecological site correlation establishes the relationship between soil components and
ecological sites. Ecological sites are correlated on the basis of soils and the resulting differences in
species composition, proportion of species, and total production of the reference plant community. In
some cases it is necessary to extrapolate data on the composition and production of a plant
community on one soil to describe the plant community on a similar soil for which no data are
available. The separation of two distinct soil taxonomic units does not necessarily delineate two
ecological sites. Likewise, some soil taxonomic units occur over broad environmental gradients and
may support more than one distinctive historic climax plant community. Changes may be brought
about by other influences, such as an increase or decrease in average annual precipitation.
Ecological sites are correlated within MLRAs or LRUs. Refer to the National Ecological Site
Handbook (https://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov/) for details on the policy for correlating ecological
sites.
C. Responsibilities.-Soil scientists and the responsible discipline specialists work together to map
soils and ecological sites. Essential activities include developing a soil survey memorandum of
understanding, including an ecological site component in all soil survey project plans, determining the
composition of map units, preparing map legends, determining mapping intensity, and conducting
necessary field reviews. Soil survey regional directors have the final responsibility for correlating
ecological sites to the map unit component to ensure coordination among States and land use areas.
622.7 Windbreaks
D. Definition.-A windbreak is a living barrier of trees or a combination of trees and shrubs that is
located adjacent to a farmstead, field, feedlot, or other area. It is established to protect soil resources,
reduce wind erosion, conserve energy or moisture, control snow deposition, provide shelter for
livestock or wildlife, or increase the natural beauty of an area. It is also called a field windbreak,
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
feedlot windbreak, or farmstead windbreak, depending upon its intended use. Field windbreaks, often
called shelterbelts, are long, narrow strips of trees and shrubs that are planted in a variety of patterns
to check the movement of wind.
E. Policy.-Soil interpretations are made for all soils in all areas where windbreaks are a present or
potential practice. These interpretations are to be included in field office technical guides, soil
handbooks, and published soil surveys. Soil scientists work with foresters in preparing windbreak
interpretations. Refer to the National Forestry Manual) for forestland interpretations. Conservation
Tree/Shrub Group is a forestland interpretation useful for windbreak planning (see Part 537.4, Exhibit
537-15 of manual).
622.8 Wildlife Habitat
A. Definition.-The habitat of a particular animal is defined as the place where the animal lives.
Each habitat is the entire environmental complex, both living and nonliving, that is present at the
place occupied by the animal species. Ratings are based on soils in their described condition and do
not consider existing vegetation, water sources, or the presence or absence of wildlife in the area.
These factors need to be considered during the site evaluation and planning process in order to obtain
total habitat quality.
B. Policy.-Soil interpretations can be developed for all soils that have the potential to provide some
form of habitat to locally adapted wildlife species. Soil scientists and biologists work together to
identify specific wildlife habitat elements and to develop the categorical lists for the local area. This
information is based on the inherent capabilities of the soil to produce certain kinds of vegetation for
use as wildlife habitat or as habitat that meets the specific requirements of an animal species. Part
512 of the National Biology Manual (available online at:
http://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov//OpenNonWebContent.aspx?content=17895.wba) provides more
information.
622.9 Plant Name, Common
A. Definition.-The common plant name is the common name, accepted by the State or region, for
the plant species or general .
B. Entries.-None required. The common plant name used in a specific State will be provided by
the system from the PLANTS database (available online at: http://plants.usda.gov/) to match the plant
symbol entered elsewhere. Adjustment or additions can be made.
622.10 Plant Name, Scientific
A. Definition.-Scientific plant name is the full genus and species name with author. Refer to
PLANTS, Plant List of Accepted Nomenclature, Taxonomy, and Symbols.
B. Significance.-This information is important for technology transfer and interchange.
C. Entries.-None required. The system will provide the scientific plant name to match the plant
symbol entered elsewhere.
622.11 Ecological Site ID
A. Definition.-Ecological site ID integrates a coding scheme for labeling LRRs, MLRA, LRUs,
and ecological sites to achieve the following four objectives:
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
(1) To represent the hierarchy.
(2) To provide flexibility for expanding and contracting subdivisions.
(3) To provide a code that retains current and familiar symbols.
(4) To be intuitive and easily discernable at a quick glance.
B. Entries.-Enter the unique ID for the ecosystem for each map unit component where needed.
Valid entries are combinations of numbers and/or letters up to 10 characters in length.
622.12 Ecological Site Name
A. Definition.-Ecological site name is the descriptive name of a particular ecological site. For
example, \"Loamy Upland\" is a name of an ecological site.
B. Entries.-Enter the appropriate name of the ecological site for each map unit component where
needed.
622.13 Earth Cover, Kind
A. Definition.-Earth cover, kind, is the natural or artificial material that is observed to cover a
portion of the earth\'s surface. It is determined (at least conceptually) as a vertical projection
downward. There are two levels of categories.
B. Significance.-Earth cover, kind, is useful in assessing soils for use and management and
monitoring for soil health. Identifying earth cover, kind, is important when linking to National
Resources Inventory (NRI) data. Soil data ranges included in the map unit records in NASIS may be
narrowed by indicating the cover type present for each map unit component. Significant differences
for interpretations between the major cover types can be shown by designating each map unit
component with the appropriate cover types. Earth cover, kind, is divided into two levels. The second
is a subdivision of the first.
C. Earth Cover Kind Level One Classes.-The seven Level One classes correspond to the Level One
categories used in the National Resources Inventory.
(1) Crop cover.-The cover lasting the full cropping cycle (which includes land preparation,
leaving a post-harvest residue cover of annual or perennial herbaceous plants that are
cultivated or harvested or both) in the production of food, feed, oil, and fiber other than wood
and excluding hay and pasture.
(2) Grass/herbaceous cover.-Non-woody vegetative cover (>50% grass, grass-like, or forb
cover) composed of annual or perennial grasses, grass-like plants (sedges/rushes), forbs
(including alfalfa and clovers), mosses, lichens, and ferns.
(3) Tree cover.-Vegetative cover (>25% tree canopy cover) recognized as woody plants which
usually have one perennial stem, a definitely formed crown of foliage, and a mature height of
at least 4 meters. This category contains all trees, even those planted for the purpose of
producing food or ornamentals, including Christmas trees. It also includes those lands which
have been harvested of trees, even those that have been clear cut but will return to tree cover.
(4) Shrub cover.-Vegetative cover (>50% shrub canopy cover) composed of multi-stemmed,
woody plants, and single-stemmed species that attain less than 4 meters in height at maturity.
This category contains all shrubs and woody vines, even those planted for the purpose of
producing food.
(5) Barren land.-Nonvegetative (<5% vegetated cover) natural cover on soils that commonly
have a limited capacity to support vegetation and have a surface layer of sand, rock, thin soil,
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
or permanent ice or snow. This category also includes bare soil resulting from construction
activities and extractive activities, such as mining.
(6) Artificial cover.-Nonvegetative cover either made or modified by human activities that
prohibit or restrict vegetative growth and water penetration. Examples include highways,
rooftops, road surfaces, paved and stone surface parking areas, sidewalks, and driveways.
(7) Water cover.-Earth covered by water in a fluid state. This category includes seasonally
frozen areas.
CODE     CLASS
C        Crop cover
G        Grass/herbaceous cover
T        Tree cover
S        Shrub cover
B        Barren land
A        Artificial cover
W        Water cover
D. Earth Cover Kind Level Two Classes.-The 28 Level Two classes are grouped as subdivisions of
Level One classes (except water cover) as follows:
Level 1:         Crop cover
Level 2
(1)           Row crops.-Examples are corn, soybeans, cotton, tomatoes, and tulips.
(2)           Close-grown crops.-Examples are wheat, rice, oats, and rye.
Level 1:      Grass/herbaceous cover
Level 2
(3)           Rangeland, grassland (<10% trees, <20% shrubs).-This subdivision includes
rangeland used for hayland, with plants such as bluestems, mixed midgrasses, and
shortgrasses.
(4)           Rangeland, savanna.-10 to 25% tree cover
(5)           Rangeland, shrubby.-20 to 50% shrub cover. (e.g., sumac, sagebrush, mesquite)
(6)           Rangeland, tundra
(7)           Pastureland, tame.-Examples are fescues, bromegrass, timothy, and lespedeza.
(8)           Hayland.-Examples are fescues, bromegrass, timothy, and alfalfa.
(9)           Marshland.-Examples are grasses and grass-like plants.
(10)          Other grass/herbaceous cover
Level 1:      Tree cover
Level 2
(11)          Crop trees.-Examples are apples, pecans, date palms, citrus, ornamental nursery
stock, and Christmas trees.
(12)          Conifers.-Examples are spruce, pines, and Douglas-fir.
(13)          Hardwoods.-Examples are oak, hickory, elm, and aspen.
(14)          Intermixed conifers and hardwoods.-An example is an oak-pine mix.
(15)          Tropical.-Examples are mangrove and royal palms.
(16)          Swamp.-Trees and shrubs.
(17)          Other tree cover
Level 1:      Shrub cover
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
Level 2
(18)         Crop shrubs.-Examples are filberts, blueberry, and ornamentals used as nursery
stock.
(19)         Crop vines.-Examples are grapes, blackberries, and raspberries.
(20)         Native shrubs.-Examples are creosote bush, shrub live oak, sagebrush, and
mesquite. (Includes rangeland with >50% shrub cover.)
(21)         Other shrub cover.
Level 1:     Barren land
Level 2
(22)         Rock
(23)         Sand and gravel
(24)         Culturally induced barren.-Examples are saline seeps, mines, quarries, and oil-
waste land.
(25)         Permanent snow and ice
(26)         Other barren.-Examples are playas and badland. Excludes areas with culturally
induced earth cover.
Level 1:     Artificial cover
Level 2
(27)         Rural transportation.-Examples are highways and railroads.
(28)         Urban and built-up.-Examples are cities, towns, farmsteads, and industrial sites.
E. Entries.-Enter the applicable Earth Cover Kind Level One class for each map unit component.
Enter the applicable Earth Cover Kind Level Two class as appropriate.
(430-622-NSSH, June 2020)
