Part 607 - Initial Soil Survey Preparation
Subpart B - Exhibits
607.10 Reference Materials for Soil Surveys
A. Soil Surveys in the MLRA
Older soil surveys of the current survey area and nearby areas
Soil surveys of adjoining areas
Soil surveys for conservation planning
Soil survey quality control data, including field notes and documentation
Soil survey quality assurance documents
Soil correlation memoranda and amendments
B. Reference Maps
Original field sheets
Maps of major land resource areas
General soil map
All available aerial photography and other remote-sensing coverage
U.S. Geological Survey topographic and slope maps
Public land surveys
Maps and text on geology, geomorphology, geography, and water resources
Maps and text on vegetation and land use
Climatic maps and data
Maps of flood plains
Maps and text on air resources
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service wetland maps
C. Reports and Inventories
Census reports
Reports of crop-reporting services
River basin reports
State, regional, or county land use plans and regulations
Resource conservation and development work plans
Public lands management reports and inventories
Bulletins and reports of State agricultural experiment stations
National Food Security Act Manual and similar manuals
National Resource Inventory data
Field office technical guides
Soil laboratory data
D. Scientific and Research Reports and Data
Theses and dissertations of college or university students
International Taxonomy Committee reports, such as those on wet soils, Aridisols, and Andisols
Articles in scientific and technical journals
Well logs from local or State agencies
NRCS drainage, irrigation, and erosion-control guides and maps
Percolation test results from local agencies
Highway soil test data
Climate data
Geomorphology studies
E. Forestry, Range, and Wildlife Inventories and Studies
Forest inventories
Range inventories
Studies and reports on wildlife habitat recreational sites
F. Official Soil Series and Soil Interpretations
Soil interpretations information in the databases for the taxa assumed to be in the survey area
Official soil series descriptions
Archived copies of previous official series descriptions and soil interpretation records
G. Databases
Pedon database
National Soil Information System
Digital General Soil Map of the United States
Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database
H. Digital Data
Digital orthophotography
Digital raster graphic
Digital elevation model
Multi-spectral data
Common land units
USFS terrestrial ecological unit inventories
Digital hydrography, transportation, etc.
Digital remote sensing, such as Landsat and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS)
607.11 Example of a Procedure for Geodatabase Development, File Naming,
Archiving, and Quality Assurance
A. Geodatabase Development
(1) Set up geodatabases with topology and import data layers.
-   Use the standards for file naming
-   Create a geodatabase
-   Import data into the geodatabase
-   Project data to the desired geographic location
-   Create a feature dataset
-   Import template feature classes
-   Set up domains
(2)    Set up the map environment for creating digital soils data.
- Create a map and add data layers
- Customize a map, using-
-- Toolbars and menus
-- Symbology
-- Image display
- Create a layer overview
- Add or delete fields and calculate values
- Set selectable layers
(3) Utilize various software in combination with appropriate data sets to accurately draft and revise
soil mapping on screen.
(4) Import, create, and display georeferenced information to validate soil map accuracy.
(5) Create metadata to capture data sources and processes used in the development of digital
mapping.
B. File Naming System
The geodatabase is named as follows: State abbreviation followed by county or parish FIPS code,
\"OFFICIAL,\" and the current date (two-digit month, day, and year) (e.g.,
PG695_OFFICIAL_072105).
C. Archiving
In order to protect electronic data from accidental loss or software or hardware failure, certain
archiving procedures are implemented.
(1) The MLRA soil survey leader or project leader establishes an office archive procedure and
communicates it to all soil scientists working on the project.
(2) The project leader adds metadata notes into the geodatabase, compacts the geodatabase, and
makes a copy of it using the copy and paste function in ArcCatalog. The copy is then renamed
by changing \"OFFICIAL\" to \"GIS\" and using the current date (e.g., PG695_GIS_072205).
(3) The project leader confirms that metadata notes are kept to record scale of digitizing and
imagery used. Brief metadata entries are made in the \"Abstract\" section of the metadata in
ArcCatalog for each geodatabase version that is sent for archiving. Notes in the \"Abstract\" and
\"Purpose\" sections may also be made for feature classes.
(4) The following schedule should be followed to safeguard the geodatabase:
- Daily.-All new or edited soil mapping data is backed up to hard drive storage at the soil
survey office. A separate copy of the geodatabase is therefore saved on a hard drive separate
from that of the active file being edited.
-- Edits are frequently saved during an edit session in case the software crashes. Saving
edits is different from saving the geodatabase.
-- Topology is frequently validated, and errors are fixed while editing.
-- The geodatabases are compacted in ArcCatalog.
- Weekly.-All new or edited soil mapping data is copied onto a CD or DVD and stored
offsite for security. Updates can be added to previous media in order to maintain an archive
of edited versions.
- Monthly.-When soil mapping data are being updated, a copy of the geodatabase is sent by
compressing it into a WinZip file and attaching this file to an email (or on a CD or DVD) to
designated GIS staff. If no edits have been made, this is not necessary.
- Annually.-After completing a 100-percent quality control review of the digital data, the
project leader sends a copy of the overall geodatabase to the soil survey regional office for
quality assurance.
D. Quality Assurance
(1) The MLRA soil survey leader completes a 100-percent quality control review of digital data,
validates topology for the entire feature class, and fixes identified errors. After the quality
control review is completed, a copy of the geodatabase is renamed (e.g., PG675_QA_current
date) and then sent to the soil survey regional office for quality assurance.
(2) A soil data quality specialist compares digital data with the field sheets during annual reviews
or field assistance visits and discusses differences. For soil survey offices that use only digital
mapping data, the review evaluates landscape registration and map unit concepts. An
additional brief review is completed at the end of the survey.
(3) The soil survey regional office reviews monthly copies for quality of boundary line work and
geodatabase properties.
(4) Offices that have soil mapping on paper field sheets perform a 100-percent review of
progressive digitizing when the soil survey is completed or when interim data are finalized.
