Part 600 - Introduction
Subpart A - General Information
600.0 The Mission of the Soil Science Division, Natural Resources Conservation
Service
The Soil Science Division provides leadership and service to produce and deliver scientifically based
soil information to help society understand, value, and wisely manage global resources.
600.1 Purpose
The National Soil Survey Handbook and other technical and procedural references provide the
standards, guidelines, definitions, policy, responsibilities, and procedures for conducting the National
Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) in the United States.
600.2 National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) Standards
NCSS standards are common or shared procedures that enhance technology transfer, data sharing, and
communications among soil survey participants. They apply to various soil survey functions. The
references listed in part 600, subpart B, section 600.10, contain standards.
600.3 Principal References and Their Maintenance
A. The three principal publications guiding the NCSS are the Soil Survey Manual, \"Soil Taxonomy,\"
and the National Soil Survey Handbook. Part 600, subpart B, section 600.10, lists other technical
references that are important in gathering and applying soil knowledge. The following paragraphs
describe how these publications are revised and how they apply to the NCSS in the United States.
B. The Soil Survey Manual
(1) The purpose of Agriculture Handbook 18, the Soil Survey Manual, is to provide the major
principles and concepts for making and using soil surveys and the standards and conventions
for describing soils. The manual is intended primarily for use by soil scientists engaged in
making and interpreting soil surveys. It is also the basic reference for soil survey users who
desire to learn the scientific methods that form the basis for soil surveys. It discusses general
procedures to illustrate and explain the principles and concepts, but the National Soil Survey
Handbook presents current operational procedures of NRCS in more detail.(2) Amendments
may be issued to the Soil Survey Manual as NRCS directives. Proposals to amend the manual
may originate from any interested individual or group participating in the NCSS or from
staffs of foreign soil survey organizations. The originating group or author forwards the
proposal to the national leader for soil survey standards.
C. \"Soil Taxonomy\" and \"Keys to Soil Taxonomy\"
Agriculture Handbook 436, second edition (1999), \"Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil
Classification for Making and Interpreting Soil Surveys,\" provides the common base for the
organization of knowledge about soils and the standards for their classification. \"Keys to Soil
Taxonomy,\" which is periodically revised, provides excerpts of \"Soil Taxonomy\" that can be
readily used in the field and contains all the approved revisions and amendments to \"Soil
Taxonomy.\" Procedures to amend \"Soil Taxonomy\" are outlined in part 614 of this handbook.
D. The National Soil Survey Handbook
(1) Unlike manuals in eDirectives, which \"issue policies and procedures on a specific subject,\"
the National Soil Survey Handbook provides guidelines, definitions, responsibilities, and
how-to procedures for conducting the NRCS part of the NCSS (Title 120, National Directives
Management Manual (NDMM)). It contains information relative to planning and managing
soil surveys, collecting and maintaining soil survey information, and distributing the
information to users. The National Soil Survey Handbook provides specific information
about the field activities, correlation, interpretation, publication, and dissemination of soil
surveys of the NCSS.
(2) The National Soil Survey Center updates the National Soil Survey Handbook on a periodic
basis. Any member of the NCSS may suggest changes or additions to the handbook. The
originating author sends the proposed changes or additions, along with an explanation of and
support for the need for the change or addition, to the national leader for soil survey standards
at the National Soil Survey Center. The center reviews proposed changes, amendments, and
additions at least annually. The director of the Soil Science Division issues approved
amendments and notifies users of the National Soil Survey Handbook. This handbook is not
to be amended or supplemented by regional or local offices.
E. User Manuals
User manuals contain procedures for conducting soil survey activities, such as those related to the
electronic storage and display of soil information. Examples are the user guides for the National
Soil Information System.
F. Guides
Guides provide special information and criteria for various functions, such as interpreting soils
and updating major land resource areas. Regional guides may be developed and used as needed to
supplement national guides.
600.4 Conventions and Terminology
The following are conventions and terminology used in the National Soil Survey Handbook. Unless
otherwise stated, all information provided herein are standards of the National Cooperative Soil
Survey.
(1) Policy.-A principle to be followed to guide decisions to achieve a desired outcome. Policy
differs from procedure or protocol in that a policy contains the \"what\" and the \"why\" only.
Procedures or protocols also include the \"what,\" \"how,\" \"where,\" and \"when.\" Policies are
determined and adopted by the Chief and may be delegated to other senior staff within
NRCS. Protocols and procedures are developed by the senior managers to implement policy.
Title 130, General Manual, Part 407, \"National Policy,\" states that policies are adopted to
ensure-
(i) Conformance to laws and rules.
(ii) Implementation of Executive orders and other Executive direction.
(iii) Program quality control.
(iv) Accountability.
(v) Quality, consistency, and coordination in products and services.
(2) Standard.-An established requirement defining technical criteria, methods, processes, or
practices that must be accomplished or adhered to in order to ensure mission objectives are
being met. Soil survey standards include sets of definitions and specifications. The definitions
are standardized to ensure that everyone is using terminology that has the same meaning.
Standards ensure consistency and repeatability of field procedures and analytical procedures
so that soil surveys meet user needs and processes are repeatable in all locations. Standards
may also apply to the results or performance of the soil survey information and data.
(3)  Procedure.-An established or official step-by-step set of instructions for completing a task.
(4)  Protocol.-Mandatory steps or a system of rules that detail the correct conduct and
procedures to be followed in formal situations to ensure policy is adhered to. An example of
this would be the process for amending the National Soil Survey Handbook.
(5)  Process.-Chronological set of linked steps or actions for accomplishing a task.
(6)  Guideline.-Any document that aims to streamline particular processes according to a set
routine. By definition, following a guideline is never mandatory. Guidelines are an essential
part of the larger process of governance. They may be issued and used by an organization to
make the actions of its employees or divisions more predictable and, presumably, of higher
quality.
(7)  Method.-An established means for completing an action. There may be more than one
method available to accomplish a task.
(8)  Exhibit.-An example, typically showing a completed product. Exhibits do not imply that
protocols, policy, or standards were followed unless explicitly stated that such is the case.
(An exhibit may be an example of what not to do.)
600.5 Standards of the National Cooperative Soil Survey
A. The procedures and guidance (a.k.a., \"standards\") used in the Soil Survey Program are dynamic
and may change. Standards are critical to the success of developing and delivering accurate and
consistent soil survey information to the public.
B. Standards are a set of rules or criteria. They serve as the metric to determine if mission objectives
are being met. Standards may take on a number of forms and be developed in a number of ways. Soil
survey standards include sets of definitions and specifications. The definitions are standardized to
ensure everyone is using terminology that has the same meaning. Standards apply to the use of
specific processes, procedures, or methodologies in order ensure consistency and repeatability of field
procedures and analytical procedures. They can also apply to the results or performance of the soil
survey information and data. Many of the standards used by the NCSS are applied nationally and
internationally by the soil science discipline.
C. Soil survey standards should convey requirements clearly and concisely. For standards to be
meaningful, they must be written, maintained, and readily available to reference and they must be
followed in conducting and delivering soil survey products. Specific rules are followed in the
development, modification, and maintenance of standards. Soil survey standards are managed and
maintained by the Soil Survey Standards Branch at the National Soil Survey Center. Requests for
changes or additions in soil survey standards should be directed to the national leader for soil survey
standards.
D. The flowchart in part 600, subpart B, section 600.11, shows the steps that guide revision of the
National Soil Survey Handbook (120-NDMM).
